docs: update disaster recovery chapter (#2310)
bareos/bareos: docs/manuals/source/Appendix/DisasterRecoveryUsingBareos.rst

Bootstrap

-  The media containing the backup. If the backup itself has been
   destroyed, it is of course no longer possible to restore it. You
   should therefore always swap out backups in some form or at least
   separate them from the actual backup system.

-  The configuration of the storage daemon. If the properties of the
   replacement system have changed (paths or SCSI devices, for example),
   you have to adjust the storage daemon configuration to suit the new
   environment.

-  The ``Bootstrap`` file of the most recent backup of the database,
   i.e. of the ``BackupCatalog`` job.

In our example, bootstrap file :file:`BackupCatalog.bsr` looks like
this:

::

   # 15-Mar-2025 11:02:42 - BackupCatalog.2025-03-15_11.02.39_10 - Full
   Volume="E01001L4"
   MediaType="LTO-4"
   Slot=1
   VolSessionId=2
   VolSessionTime=1331805611
   VolAddr=4294967296-4294967297
   FileIndex=1-1

We use ``bextract`` to extract the most recent database backup from the
Bareos media. The call-up syntax is:

::

   bextract -c <SD configuration directory>  <drive name in sd.conf> <output directory>  -b <bootstrap file>

``bextract`` now extracts the data specified in the ``<Bootstrap file>``

> to the ``<output file>`` using drive ``<drive name>``. ``bextract``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the ``<output directory>`` using drive ``<drive name>``. ``bextract``
```

   15-Mär 12:07 bextract JobId 0: 3302 Autochanger "loaded? drive 0", result is Slot 1.
   15-Mär 12:07 bextract JobId 0: Ready to read from volume "E01001L4" on device "Drive-1" (/dev/nst0).
   15-Mär 12:07 bextract JobId 0: Forward spacing Volume "E01001L4" to file:block 1:0.
   bextract JobId 0: -rw-------   1 bareos   bareos         87862 2025-03-15 11:02:42  /tmp/var/lib/bareos/bareos.sql
   15-Mär 12:07 bextract JobId 0: End of Volume at file 2 on device "Drive-1" (/dev/nst0), Volume "E01001L4"
   15-Mär 12:07 bextract JobId 0: End of all volumes.
   1 files restored.

We have successfully extracted the database dump to file
:file:`/tmp/var/lib/bareos/bareos.sql`. We now want to import it to
the Bareos database, so we use Bareos scripts to create the database,
tables and access permissions:

::

   root@bareos:/usr/lib/bareos/scripts # ./create_bareos_database
   Creating postgresql database
   CREATE DATABASE
   ALTER DATABASE
   Creation of bareos database succeeded.
   Database encoding OK

   root@bareos:/usr/lib/bareos/scripts # make_bareos_tables
   Making postgresql tables
   [...]
   INSERT 0 1
   Creation of Bareos PostgreSQL tables succeeded.

>    root@bareos:/usr/lib/bareos/scripts # grant_bareos_privileges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   root@bareos: su postgres -c /usr/lib/bareos/scripts/grant_bareos_privileges
```

We now import the database dump to the database:

::

   root@bareos:~ #  psql bareos < /tmp/var/lib/bareos/bareos.sql

> Finally you start the director. The system is now restored with all

Reviewer: I would also suggest here to move the restored /tmp/etc/bareos back to it's original location, so the daemons can be started system wise.
If we don't specify that step, there will be people starting their restored catalog with the new fresh default bareos etc, and of course some configuration will be missing like previously defined jobs, clients, fileset, pools etc ...

```suggestion

We bring back the restored configuration to its initial location
::
cp -a /tmp/etc/bareos /etc/bareos

Finally you restart the services (director,storage,filedaemon).
::
systemctl restart bareos-director bareos-storage bareos-filedaemon

The system is now restored with all
```

.. _section-RestoreServer:

Disaster Restoring a Bareos Server
----------------------------------

.. index::
   single: Disaster Recovery; Bareos Server
   single: Restore; Bareos Server

If correctly configured, Bareos protects you from data loss caused by
data deletion or a complete system breakdown. At most, you could lose
the data generated since the last backup.

As long as you still have the data carriers containing your backups, you will
be able to restore your data. Bareos uses the same data format for all data

> carriers, so the tools will be able to access the data, whether they are stored

Reviewer: Should we change it to 
``Bareos uses the same data API for all data carriers`` ?

on hard drives, tapes or cloud volumes.

Precautionary measures that protect the Bareos system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first measure you should take in any Bareos installation to prevent
loss of data is to back up the database (the ``Job`` named
``BackupCatalog``). This backup 'must' be configured in every Bareos
installation, and it always runs as the last job of the day so it
includes all jobs of the day.
This job also saves the configuration files of the bareos system.
In the default setup, this job also sends the bootstrap file via email.

> Additionally, it is also a good idea to have the current configuration files
> also available on a second system.

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, we strongly suggest to have the current configuration files
also available on a second system.
```

and their storage locations are also available.

Of course an emergency restore of the Bareos system is only possible if
you have storage media containing the necessary data. The degree of
destruction and available restore data determine the restore method. The
aim is always to get the backup system working again in a way as
efficient as possible. Less damage and more available restore data make this
stage quicker to achieve.

Tools
~~~~~

Next to programs for regular operation (director, file daemon, storage daemon,
Bareos console) a Bareos installation contains additional service programs.
Programs that work with media require a valid storage daemon configuration
because they use the same routines to access storage media as the storage
daemon does in normal operation. Other programs require the configuration file
of the director, as they assess the configuration settings stored there.

It is therefore a great advantage if the configuration files of your
installation are available in an emergency. Otherwise, an emergency
restore must be preceded by the restoring of the configuration.
In most cases you will lack the time to do this properly.

.. warning::

>    Conclusion keep a copy at least of the storage daemon able to read

Author: ```suggestion
   Conclusion: Keep a copy at least of the storage daemon able to read
```

   the disaster recovery volume in an accessible format and location.

``bextract`` allows you to extract data directly from Bareos media. It
need a functioning storage daemon configuration file.

``bls`` displays the content of Bareos media. It can access both tapes
and files in the file system. It need a functioning storage daemon
configuration file.

Performing an emergency restore
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the following section we will assume that our backup system itself
has failed. We need the following to restore it:

Preparation steps :

-  The media containing the backup. If the backup itself has been
   destroyed, it is of course no longer possible to restore it. You
   should therefore always swap out backups in some form or at least
   separate them from the actual backup system.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Reinstall Bareos software components to the system. A default configuration will be deployed and can be used as a start.

```

-  The configuration of the storage daemon. If the properties of the
   replacement system have changed (paths or SCSI devices, for example),
   you have to adjust the storage daemon configuration to suit the new
   environment.

-  The ``Bootstrap`` file of the most recent backup of the database,
   i.e. of the ``BackupCatalog`` job.

> 

Author: Do we maybe also say that you need to install the bareos software including all tools and the required sd backends?

Reviewer: You make a point here, we might want to have explicit steps, and as it is so obvious for us raise the flag it is not for newcomers
